Psychological research over the past 50 years has investigated the
differences between liking someone, loving someone and being “in
love”. Liking is described as having positive thoughts and feelings
towards someone and finding that person’s company rewarding. We
often also experience warmth and closeness towards the people we
like. In some instances we choose to be emotionally intimate with
these people. When we love someone we experience the same positive
thoughts and experiences as when we like a person. But we also
experience a deep sense of care and commitment towards that person.
Being “in love” includes all the above but also involves feelings of
sexual arousal and attraction. However, research into people’s own
views of love suggests that not all love is the same.
Romantic love consists of two types: passionate and companionate
love. Most romantic relationships, whether they be heterosexual or
same sex, involve both these parts. Passionate love is what people
typically consider being “in love”. It includes feelings of passion
and an intense longing for someone, to the point they might
obsessively think about wanting to be in their arms. The second part
is known as companionate love. It’s not felt as intensely, but it’s
complex and connects feelings of emotional intimacy and commitment
with a deep attachment toward the romantic partner.
As partners learn more about each other and become more confident in
the long-term future of the relationship, routines develop. The
opportunities to experience novelty and excitement can also decline,
as can the frequency of sexual activity. This can cause passionate
love to subside. Although a reduction in passionate love is not
experienced by all couples, various studies report approximately
20-40% of couples experience this downturn. Of couples who have been
married in excess of ten years, the steepest downturn is most likely
to occur over the second decade.